---
abstract: |
    I argue that higher levels of sectoral competition increased
    state-capacities over time. Specifically, I explain how the emergence of
    industrial elites lowered levels of inter-sectoral inequality, pushing
    the agricultural and industrial elites to reach agreements that
    materialized in investments in state-making institutions, causing in
    turn higher state-capacities. Exploiting the exogeneity of earthquake
    shocks, I leverage a novel intertemporal dataset on Chilean earthquake
    death tolls and a Bayesian multilevel Poisson model to account for state
    capacities between 1900 and 2010. I contend that the capacity the state
    has of enforcing and monitoring building codes throughout the territory
    is a reflection of its overall state capacities. To explore the causal
    mechanisms at work more deeply, I leverage the Chilean case, presenting
    some historical evidence showing that the rise of the industrial
    economic sector pushed agricultural and industrial political elites to
    invest in state-making institutions, particularly, the implementation of
    the income tax law. What my empirical analyses show is twofold.
    Death-tolls decrease, that is, state capacities increase, (1) when
    levels of sectoral contestation increase overtime, and (2) once the
    income tax law is implemented, finding support for the fiscal sociology
    paradigm, and particularly for the idea that direct taxation causes
    state-building.
author:
- |
    <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Héctor Bahamonde</span>\
    [^1] PhD Candidate $\bullet$ Political Science Dpt. $\bullet$ Rutgers
    University\
    `e:`[`hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu`](mailto:hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu)\
    `w:`[`www.hectorbahamonde.com`](http://www.hectorbahamonde.com)
bibliography:
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/Bahamonde_BibTex2013.bib'
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/library.bib'
csl: '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/APA_Style.csl'
...

[`here`](https://github.com/hbahamonde/Earthquake_Paper/raw/master/Bahamonde_Earthquake_Paper.pdf).

Students of the Latin American states have several theories to explain
the causes and consequences of state capacities. Scholars also have
countless alternatives to measure state capacities. However, there
exists a huge deficit. Most state formation theories (just to name a
few) are situated during precolonial,[^2] early[^3] or late[^4]
independent Latin America. Yet, we lack of a measurement that
corresponds *temporally* with the theories we have. While our
explanations of state-making are *historical* in nature, in practice,
most available measurements capture *contemporary* levels of stateness.
In this paper I try to bridge this gap by providing an explanation on
the origins of state capacities in Latin America and a corresponding
indicator able to capture levels of state capacities *over time*. This
paper then seeks to contribute to the state formation literature in
general, both from a theoretical and methodological perspectives.

![Causal Mechanism\[causal:mechanism:fig\]](causal_path.pdf)

I argue that higher levels of sectoral contestation, both nationally and
subnationally conceptualized, increased state-capacities over time.
Specifically, I explain how the emergence of industrial elites lowered
levels of inter-sectoral inequality, pushing both agricultural and
industrial elites to reach agreements that materialized in investments
in state-*making* institutions, causing in turn higher state-capacities
(). Exploiting the exogeneity of earthquake shocks, I leverage a novel
dataset on Chilean earthquake death tolls overtime and a Bayesian
multilevel Poisson model with year fixed-effects to account for state
capacities between 1900 and 2010. I contend that the capacity the state
has of enforcing and monitoring building codes throughout the territory
is a *reflection* of Chile’s *overall* state capacities. Earthquakes
happen at any level of development and are orthogonal to differences in
regime type. Consequently, death-toll differentials should be associated
with state-capacities only. However, the ability the central level has
of enforcing these (and other) institutions depends on whether
subnational elites are willing to cooperate with the central level,
implementing these norms. In other words, state-*making* requires the
political incorporation of subnational entities into the respective
national projects. The argument explains that higher levels of sectoral
threats led both political elites to make institutional compromises. In
this paper I identify one such compromise, the implementation of the
national income tax law. Sectoral threats were more credible when the
relevant elite at the local level was *not* the same that lead the
national economy, signaling a generalized situation of sectoral
indeterminacy, where neither the industrial nor the agricultural sectors
were the dominant elites. For instance there were higher levels of
contestation when there were sustained levels of *national* agricultural
growth in the presence of consolidated industrial clusters at the
*subnational* level. In turn, the income tax law was a state-*making*
institution. Similarly, while the income tax law was implemented
nationally, compliance depended on subnational cooperation too. As I
detail later, lower levels of sectoral inequality fostered the
incorporation of industrial elites into the national project, and hence
they were willing to pay the national income tax in exchange of public
goods delivered at the subnational level. Finally, what my empirical
analyses show is twofold. Death-tolls decreased, that is, *state
capacities increased*, when (1) levels of national/subnational sectoral
contestation increased overtime, and (2) after the income tax law was
implemented. This last finding in particular finds support for the
fiscal sociology paradigm, and particularly, for the idea that direct
taxation has positive externalities on state-*capacities*, making this
institution a state-*making* institution.

The crux of the argument is that sectoral conflicts *triggered* state
development. Elites whose assets are allocated in different sectors of
the economy have different preferences over state centralization and
direct taxation. Consequently, economic expansion of these two economic
sectors not only shaped the economic landscape; given that each sector
had a corresponding political arm, the *political* conflict is rooted
into a broader *economic conflict* conflict too.[^5] I sketch a theory
where state-penetration and institutional enforcement are higher when
the mayor economic sectors of the economy are incorporated into the same
state-building national project. Elite incorporation is possible
contingent on the capacity the new elites have of overthrowing the
institutional order that permitted hegemonic groups to rule without
opposition. The landed Latin American elites were an economic hegemonic
group protected by norms and institutions that originated in colonial
times. While the agricultural sector dominated most of the economy, the
landowning class controlled most of the politics.[^6] However, when the
*structural transformation* (that is, the “secular decline of
agriculture and substantial expansion of manufacturing”)[^7] took place,
this process imposed tight constraints on the way politics was run by
the incumbent landowning class.[^8] Thus, given the initial advantage of
the landed elites, the secular emergence of the industrial sector also
meant the reduction of inter-sectoral inequality, generating political,
economic and military threats to the landed elites.[^9] The higher the
threats, the more likely the inter-sectoral compromises.

I contend that lower levels of inter-sectoral inequality made possible
higher levels of inter-sectoral contestation giving way to a series of
inter-elite compromises (yellow box in ) that fostered higher levels of
state-capacities overtime. In this paper I identify one such compromise,
the implementation of the income tax, and how this crucial institution
for state-*making* included the preferences of both elites. Leveraging
historical evidence, I explain that Chilean industrial elites accepted
to be income taxed while demanding more state services and in exchange
of being allowed to participate in politics under fairer conditions. In
turn, I show statistical evidence that suggests that the implementation
of the income tax law had positive externalities for state-building over
time. @Bahamonde:2017ab finds that the emergence of a strong industrial
sector *accelerated* the implementation of the income tax law in a
number of Latin American countries. While he theoretically *relies* on
the fiscal sociology paradigm to argue about these positive
externalities of direct taxation on state-building, here I present
empirical cross-time evidence supporting his claims. Additionally, I
introduce a new strategy to measure levels of state capacity over time.

Critically, I claim that the capacity the state has of enforcing and
monitoring building codes depends on both *national* and *subnational*
sources of cooperation, and hence, state incorporation. @ODonnell1993
[1359] famously distinguished different levels of state penetration,
where there were *in the same country* ‘brown areas,’ or heterogeneous
areas that mixed both ‘high’ and ‘low’ levels of stateness. This
approach goes in line with @Snyder2001 [103] who explains that
subnational comparisons are useful to compare political and economic
processes that vary spatially, and with @Ziblatt2008 [286], who points
out that ‘any account, which attempts to explain local public goods
provision *without* reference to the capabilities of local government,
might be incomplete.’ Following these distinctions (and @Soifer2008a in
particular), I implement an identification strategy that not only
accounts for temporal but also for geographical sources of sectoral
contestation. While @Bahamonde:2017ab and @Bahamonde:2017aa
conceptualize sectoral contestation only at the national level, here I
argue that *national* agricultural expansion in the presence of
important *subnational* clusters of industrial development fostered a
generalized situation of sectoral indeterminacy, where no group was the
leading elite. Thinking of sectoral contestation in subnational terms is
useful for state-building. Higher levels of subnational sectoral
contestation translated into more credible threats coming from the
provinces and other distant parts of the territory. Should these
subnational sources of contestation *not* be translated into sectoral
agreements, the country risked being torn apart, or alternatively, see
the emergence of local *caudillos* or other regional ‘bosses.’ For
example, historian @Barros:1970aa [500] explains that before the civil
war, *salitreras* (nitrate towns) in northern Chile were locally so
important that they were considered ‘a state within the state.’[^10]
Local bosses had to approve on whether public employees could be fired,
whether public works could be developed, and on whether politicians
could give public speeches. Moreover, they coined their own currency and
had their own particular local laws. While my proposed measurement
captures this subnational/national *dissonance*, the theory explains how
contestation translates into cooperation and state incorporation.
Particularly, industrial elites accepted to comply with the national
income tax in exchange of public goods delivered at the local level,
suggesting a process of sectoral incorporation into the national
state-building project. Here I explain how the process of income
taxation increased state-capacities over time.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In I explain how the
conflicting sectoral nature of the implementation of the income tax is
linked to state capacities. Next, in I introduce and explain the
proposed measurement, and how it maps with state capacities. Then, in I
present some econometric evidence, and finally I offer some final
comments in . In I show some Bayesian convergence diagnostics.

Fiscal Sociology, Sectoral Conflicts and Sate Consolidation\[fiscal:sociology\]
===============================================================================

Political scientists have leveraged the sectoral conflict approach to
explain mostly democratization. For example, @Geddes1991 explains that
competition between two rival parties of about the same size creates
clearer incentives to invest in political institutions. Similarly,
@Ansell:2014ty and @Boix:2015aa examine the role of inter-elite economic
inequality/equality on democratization. Here I argue that a theory
focused on sectoral conflicts offers also a theory of state
consolidation. As others have explained, “state formation will be more
likely to the degree that powerful individual actors form two groups on
the basis of divergent economic and political interests.”[^11] This
approach is particularly relevant for the Latin American cases due to
the sectoral conflicts that existed between the agricultural and
industrial sectors.[^12] Here I contend that there are two elements that
propelled state consolidation, namely, (1) how elites invested in
different assets had different preferences over state centralization and
taxation, and (2) how lower levels of inter-sectoral inequality fostered
investments in state-*making* institutions, especially direct taxation.

Since state centralization affects landowners and industrialists in
different ways, both sectors have different preferences towards taxation
and state centralization.[^13] On the one hand, land fixity increases
the risk premium of the landed elite’s main asset,[^14] so they
systematically resist taxation. In turn, as capital can be reinvested in
nontaxable sectors, industrialists’ preferences toward taxation are more
elastic. In other words, industrialists have an ‘exit’ option[^15] that
landowners do not have. Should fiscal policy not respond to the
industrial class’ demands, they can leave the country and reinvest.[^16]
That said, these cross-sectoral differences are more likely to resolve
in favor of direct taxation when income inequality among the elites is
low.[^17] Considering the initial institutional and economical
advantages the agricultural sector enjoyed since colonial times in the
Latin American cases, reducing inter-elite inequality meant the
expansion of the industrial sector. When income inequality among the
elites is high, there are no incentives to invest in state institutions,
and rather elites rule in a monopolistic way. In other words, in
non-contested contexts, the institutional order reflects the preferences
of the landowning elites, keeping industrialists excluded from the
state-building project. However, the emergence of a strong industrial
class put pressures for centralization and investment in public goods.
@Beramendi2016 [18] explain that as industrialists depended more on
infrastructure implemented at the local level such as roads, railroads
and bridges, they “\[*preferred*\] to shoulder a higher tax burden
through progressive direct taxation.” Lower levels of inter-elite
economic inequality meant also similar degrees of military
capabilities.[^18] Under these circumstances elites had incentives to
make agreements rather than engaging in conflict when their
economic/military capacities were similar. When levels of inter-elite
inequality were low, war was more likely to exhaust all existent assets
without producing positive outcomes for either sector,[^19] putting then
pressures to reach agreements instead of engaging in armed conflicts.

In all Latin American economies during and right after the colonial
period, agriculture was the most important sector.[^20] And by
extension, agricultural political elites were the most powerful
elite.[^21] For the Chilean case in particular, @Collier:2002db [106]
have argued that initially the “national government was dominated by the
central part of the country, with owners of large agricultural holdings
playing a predominant role.”[^22] There existed an important asymmetry,
however. While both the agricultural and industrial sectors were growing
at the same pace (see , top panel), the latter were kept from
participating in politics under fair conditions.[^23] This asymmetry led
these two ‘antagonistic elites’[^24] to two bloody civil wars.
@Zeitlin:1984aa [23] argues that the civil wars challenged a “large
landed property \[elite against a\] productive capital\[ist\]
\[elite\].” However, war was not sustainable over time. For instance,
*Balmacedistas* managed to secure the support of the army, while
*congresistas* (the anti-Balmaceda group) gathered support from the
navy. Similarly, in the subsequent years of the civil war, there were a
number of *aborted* coups in 1907, 1912, 1915 and 1919,[^25] suggesting
an equilibrium where neither elite was the leading elite. Given their
relative similar degrees of economic development and military
capacities, the two elites opted for a political compromise. In 1924,
industrial elites accepted to be income taxed by agriculturalist
incumbents in exchange of having more *state services* and having a more
open political system. Importantly, the non-agricultural sector
“accepted taxation, *while demanding state services and expecting to
influence how tax revenues were spent* \[...\] *Consultation and
cooperation were relatively institutionalised between the two
sides*.”[^26] Critically, from the elite’s perspective, it was in their
interest to see these extractive capacities grow,[^27] securing this
inter-elite compromise for a longer period of time. For instance,
@Boix:1999tj and @Parente1994 explain how the development of certain
institutions or the adoption of certain technologies are not only
implemented by sustained overtime when they go in the benefit of the
elites.

The tax was not important because of the new revenue it collected,
however. While Humud (1969, p. 154) explains that the income tax
generated considerable resources for the Chilean treasury,[^28]
following the fiscal sociology paradigm, I contend that the tax was
important for state-making because its implementation required a series
of sectoral compromises, triggering a series of other institutional
investments, such as the implementation of checks-and-balances (to
monitor tax spending) and the development of skilled bureaucracies.
Moreover, unlike other ‘regular’ state institutions and services, taxing
incomes in fact infiltrated the state’s coercive sovereignty unto the
individual itself. The very implementation of the income tax produced a
secular accumulation of know-how, particularly, of technologies able to
monitor individual incomes. Observing individual economies and
transforming private income into public property is what *causes* state
consolidation.[^29] In fact, @Musgrave1992 [99] argues that since
taxation (especially of incomes) requires such a high degree of state
penetration, public finances offer the key for a theory of
state-building. Indirect taxes are, *ceteris paribus*, easier to levy,
and hence this kind of revenue is generally considered “unearned
income”[^30] or “easy-to-collect source of revenues.”[^31] Given the
relatively lower costs states have to incur to collect them, indirect
taxes have a very low impact on state-building.[^32] For example
@Krasner:1985lq [46] explains that “tariffs and export taxes are easier
to obtain than direct taxes, which require high levels of bureaucratic
skill and voluntary compliance.” In fact, when early Latin American
states depended heavily on trade taxes, the state apparatus tended to be
less developed.[^33] Since customs administrations have always been
concentrated in a few critical locations, especially ports, tariffs and
customs duties did not require an elaborate fiscal structure.[^34]
Income taxation not only triggered other state capacities helping with
the development of more skilled bureaucracies. Via a process of
assimilation, it also helped to construct the figure of the *citizen*
centered around the concept of the *taxpayer*. Regardless of an
individual’s race, religion, culture or any other kind of status, the
state classifies its subjects according to their incomes and oblige them
to pay, punishing whoever refuses to do so. From a sociological
standpoint, this “generality makes taxation a crucial element in the
development of the ‘imagined community’[^35] of the modern nation-state
\[...\] Taxation enmeshes us in the web of generalized reciprocity that
constitutes modern society.”[^36]

From Earthquake Death Tolls to State Capacities\[measurement\]
==============================================================

More than being blessed, the literature is in fact cursed with the over
abundance of poor indicators of state capacities.[^37] @Soifer2012 [589]
explains that there exists an “industry of indices measuring state
weakness, state failure, and state fragility \[which\] has cropped up in
recent years.” Yet, as @Fukuyama2013 [347] explains, its abundance
“points to the poor state of empirical measures of the quality of
states.” The literature points out to two main concerns. First, ‘most
fragility indices barely satisfy scientific standards.’[^38] And second,
most indices are conflated with analytical and conceptual problems.[^39]
One notable example is protection of the rule of law which is commonly
used to proxy state capacities.[^40] As @Kurtz2007 [543] explain, this
strategy is severely confounded “with policy preferences over the
structure of private property rights.” On the one hand, this is
problematic since the sources of these data are usually elite
interviews. To “the extent that public bureaucracies *are* effective in
imposing taxes or regulatory demands \[...\] they are likely to be
judged ‘burdensome’ and ‘growth-inhibiting’ by many
businesspersons,”[^41] introducing in this way systematic measurement
error.[^42] Likewise, expert surveys suffer from the same problem.[^43]
On the other hand, the problem is conceptual. As @Soifer2008a [247] puts
it, there is a widely spread “problem of misalignment between dimension
and indicator.” @Kurtz2012 [619] recommend to “explicitly avoid an
emphasis on outputs that are at the center of political or policy
debates, such as property rights.” For example, the U.S.S.R. did have a
strong state, however it did *not* protect property rights. Another
example has to do with the indicators provided by the World Bank. These
series are “\[c\]learly, the most comprehensive source for
cross-national measures of governance.”[^44] One of the dimensions is
the absence of violence. However, “there isn’t much byway of street
crime or military coup attempts in North Korea,”[^45] a state that can
barely provide basic services to its population. Focusing on tax rates
is not a solution either.[^46] For example, in late imperial China, “the
high taxes on peasants \[...\] were the result of rulers’ lack of power.
Chinese rulers consistently attempted to limit official’s excessive
extractions from the masses, but were unable to do so.”[^47]

This paper identifies a third limitation. Besides of their conceptual
and analytical problems, most measurements provide a rough approximation
of *contemporary* state capacities. Just to name a few examples,
@Soifer2012 [585] “builds a new measure of state capacity for \[...\]
contemporary Latin America \[combining\] multiple dimensions
(extraction, security, and the administration of basic services).”
@Kurtz2012 [618-619] propose an experimental design based on
list-experiments[^48] to study (in an unbiased way) bureaucrat’s
opinions on whether “the bureaucracy was really based on a competitive,
meritocratic process; whether tenure protections are effective; whether
extralegal payments or extortion take place,” among others. Finally,
@Soifer2016a employ a survey-based design to measure subnational state
capacities. While these measurements overcome the problems mentioned
above, they do not help us to study state capacities in a historical
setup. Economic historians and students of political development have
offered other measures that seek (or could potentially be used) to
capture levels of state capacities overtime, such as investments in
public goods like infrastructure, roads,[^49] electrification (measured
as light intensity per pixel),[^50] and railroads.[^51] However, many of
these measurement are debatable. For example, @Soifer2012 [593] explains
that “railroads were often constructed by private actors.”[^52] The same
problem applies to other types of infrastructures. The are others more
appropriated strategies such as the opening of postal offices,[^53] the
administration of national censuses[^54] and vaccination.[^55] While
these measurements advance our knowledge on levels of state capacities
*overtime*, there are still other problems. Censuses for example provide
a *non-continuous temporal measurement* of state capacities. For
instance, censuses are applied in Chile every ten years. Having just a
few snapshots of state-capacity should compromise any statistical
analysis. In turn, vaccines are usually targeted to primary and high
school students. In practice, vaccines are administered by the schools
themselves, both public and private. Private schools might be more
efficient in doing do, inflating the *average* level of state-capacity.

To solve some of these limitations, I propose earthquake death tolls as
an alternative measurement of state capacities overtime. Unlike
censuses, *unfortunately*, earthquakes happen very often. Yet, they are
not well studied in the discipline. While “\[e\]arthquakes alone claim
thousands of lives a year,”[^56] “\[d\]isasters are not as well studied
\[...\] in the field of political science.”[^57] Building on @Mann1984a
[113], the proposed measurement captures state’s ‘infrastructural’
power.[^58] “Natural hazards can be seen as a function of a specific
natural process and human \[...\] activity.”[^59] Given that earthquakes
happen at random and are completely exogenous to the affected
locality,[^60] the only part that is left unexplained is the systematic
human component, which is what the measurement captures. Earthquakes are
orthogonal to levels of state and economic development development,[^61]
and by extension, they happen at any level of state capacity.
Consequently, keeping earthquake magnitudes constant at their means,
(weighted) death counts should be attributed to the (in)capacity of the
states to invest in preparedness and mitigation institutions.[^62] I
focus on earthquakes and not on other natural disasters such as ‘extreme
temperature events, floods, landslides, and windstorms’[^63] because
earthquakes cannot be foreseen, and such, they put to a test the
capacity of the states of having their preventive institutions *already*
in place and in good shape. State capacities consist of sustained
*proactive* efforts of enforcing institutions throughout the territory,
and hence short-term *reactive* actions should *not* be considered
state-*making*.[^64] Moreover, unlike other natural disasters,
earthquakes do not allow actors to adapt their behavior while the quake
is happening. For example, in the case of famines, the institutions of
“calamity relief in India \[...\] emphasize the need for local
administrators to look for *signs*, such as large drops in food
production and increases in food prices, which *signal* an impending
crisis.”[^65] In fact, @Brancati2007 [716] explains that
“\[e\]arthquakes may provoke conflict more than any other type of
natural disaster *because* they have rapid onsets \[and\] are not
predictable.”[^66]

The capacity states have of deploying inspectors throughout the
territory to enforce quake-sensitive zoning and building codes is a
reflection of the overall levels of a country’s state capacity. Since
“\[e\]arthquake-resistant construction depends on responsible
governance,”[^67] state capacities act as a scope condition,
particularly, undermining or permitting the *implementation* of these
norms. For example, @Bilham2013 [169] explains that “although
engineering codes may *exist* \[,\] mechanisms to *implement* these
codes are largely unavailable”[^68] in low-capacity states. For example,
@Anbarci2005 [1910] explain that “while Iran has building codes which
are comparable to those existing in the United States, they tend to be
enforced only in the country’s larger cities,” failing to monitor the
countryside, which was where most of the deaths occurred in the 6.4
earthquake in Changureh in 2002.[^69] The proposed measurement bridges
this gap by incorporating and modeling the state’s capacities of
enforcing these codes at the subnational level. Critically,
“\[e\]arthquake-resistant features are costly to verify after
construction is complete \[...\] Steel reinforcement bars make a
well-known contribution to earthquake resistance concretely
buildings\[,\] not only is the steel itself invisible \[...\] but the
durability of the steel depends on the quality and quantity of concrete
around it.”[^70] This is the so called ‘cover-up’ concept:
“inappropriate foundations can be hidden beneath walls, shoddily
assembled steel work can be hidden beneath concrete \[and\] poorly mixed
concrete can be hidden behind paint.”[^71]

Only states with higher capacities overcome their political and logistic
limitations and successfully implement and enforce these regulations at
the local level. The Chilean government started its efforts to
ameliorate the impact of earthquakes after the great quake of 1928 in
Talca. A first effort happened in 1929 when [*Ley* number
4563](http://www.leychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=149306) was implemented.
The law was among the first attempts to prohibit “construction,
reconstruction or any other repairing or transformations \[...\] without
a permit from the authorities.” Importantly, the law required that all
blueprints had to be signed by an expert before the construction
started. By 1930, [*Decreto* number
4882](https://www.leychile.cl/Navegar?idNorma=1038437&idParte=0&idVersion=)
was adopted, but this time the rule made a number of technical
prescriptions,[^72] determining what kinds of construction materials
ought to be used, among other requirements. Critically, while the
central government had retained the control of the supervision of the
code since the promulgation of the *ley*, the *decreto* explicitly
created the figure of the *inspector* to supervise, enforce and monitor
these measures at the local level. Furthermore, *artículo* 414 of the
Chilean *Decreto* 4882 granted *inspectores* ‘free access to the
building’ at any time during the construction process. My measurement
picks up whether these good intentions written in paper actually scored
lower death tolls when shocked by the average earthquake.[^73]
Particularly, I find that localities with higher levels of sectoral
contestation score lower death tolls relative to localities with lower
levels of sectoral conflicts.

Properly enforced and implemented building codes, among other mitigation
measures, not only save lives. These kinds of institutions embody the
most basic form of social contract that exists between the state and its
subjects. The collapse of commerce buildings and private houses trigger
higher levels of looting and social unrest. States are interested in
preventing looting and social unrest because elected officials, as the
visible faces of *the* state, care not only about their electoral
survival (or just ‘survival’ in the case of unelected officials), but
also about the legitimacy of the whole apparatus. That is, in the event
of social unrest, not only the essential social Hobbesian-like contract
is broken but also the expectations for social peace and the ability of
the state to monopolize physical violence are questioned.[^74] The
physical presence of the state literally crumbles when institutions of
social coercion and discipline such as state schools, prisons and police
stations, collapse. For example, when the 7.0 earthquake hit Hati in
2010, the *Prison Civile de Port-au-Prince* had a population of 4,500
inmates. During the quake, five inmates died. As a prison guard
describes it, *everyone escaped. Everyone. Except the dead.* This
natural disaster exacerbated the already existent chaos, freeing “gang
bosses, kidnappers, gunmen,” among others.[^75] Critically, under these
circumstances, the legitimacy of the state, and particularly, the *tax
state*, reduces to zero. Thus, officials (elected or not), care about
the potentially negative outcomes the lack of building code enforcement
might cause. For humanitarian or selfish reasons, it is in their best
interest to make sure that these institutions are enforced throughout
the territory. Should the state fail, its extractive enterprise will be
the first one in being scrutinized.

This measurement has a number of advantages. Unlike survey-based or
policy-based measures, earthquake death tolls are an *objective*
measurement of earthquake preparedness,[^76] an activity that *any*
state *must* perform.[^77] @Kurtz:2013aa [58] for example explains that
“the best measures \[of state capacities\] would be of the sorts of
activities that all (or nearly all) states consider to be of primary
importance.” Additionally, @Soifer2008a [235-236] divides the state
infrastructural power in three layers, ‘national capabilities,’[^78] the
‘weight of the state’[^79] and a ‘subnational’ component which tracks
“the ability of the state to exercise control within its territory.”
Earthquake death tolls map well into all three components. Since death
tolls are a function of how well/bad building codes are *enforced* by
the state throughout the territory, adopting a subnational approach
seems more appropriate. For instance, there might be excluded local
elites that might not be willing to comply with national policies at the
subnational level. The proposed measurement and theoretical framework
capture these tensions, offering a theory for the conditions that foster
subnational cooperation.

The measurement has a number of drawbacks, however. Obviously, the
country needs to have earthquakes, possibly limiting the number of
potential cases. However, most “earthquakes occur at the various borders
of the Pacific plate, the Western border of the Latin American plate,
and the boundaries between the African, the Arabic and the Indian plates
and the Eurasian plate,” allowing potential cross-country comparisons
within most of the developing world.[^80] Moreover, there are countries,
like India or the United States, where earthquakes happen in certain
regions only. Presumably, mitigation policies in these places would need
to be targeted to specific areas, possibly undermining the assumption
that the these kinds of policies should penetrate the ‘entire’
territory.[^81] Another potential concern is that the ability of
counting the death-toll might be a function of state capacities
itself.[^82] However, civic organizations, the Catholic Church, and
particularly, the press (national and local) have been the main entities
who willingly or not have carried out the task of enumerating
casualties. Another potential issue has to do with the measurement of
the magnitudes. Before the instrumental period, magnitudes were obtained
in an estimative way. And while there are methods to approximate
historical felt magnitudes to instrumental-like intensities,[^83] this
unfortunately adds more than one layer of complexity. All in all, this
measurement offers a rough approximation of levels of state capacities
overtime. And while some econometric techniques might ameliorate some of
the problems, it is unlikely that they disappear completely.

Multilevel Analyses\[models\]
=============================

I constructed a novel dataset using the *Significant Earthquake
Database* compiled by the National Centers for Environmental Information
(NOAA) as a starting point.[^84] The dataset ‘contains information on
destructive earthquakes from 2150 B.C. to the present,’ and records the
number of deaths,[^85] the magnitude and year, and the latitude and
longitude of every quake, among other information. Using archival census
data from 1907 to 2012,[^86] I complemented the NOAA dataset with local
population at the municipal level where the quake hit. This way I am
able to weight the death toll by local population.[^87] Using archival
census data as well, I also considered the main economic activity of the
affected municipality,[^88] and also whether the municipality was urban
or rural.[^89] The death tolls and magnitudes proportionated by the NOAA
dataset were contrasted case by case with historical press archival
information.[^90] Magnitudes in particular were also compared with the
[International Seismological
Centre](http://www.isc.ac.uk/iscbulletin/search/bulletin/). All these
are subnational-level variables. Next, I included national-level
indicators that aim to proxy sectoral conflicts at the national level.
Following @Bahamonde:2017ab and @Bahamonde:2017aa, I proxy national
sectoral competition and specifically the degree in which the industrial
elites challenged incumbent landowners by calculating the proportion of
agricultural growth relative to industrial growth as presented in the
[MOxLAD](http://moxlad-staging.herokuapp.com/home/en?) data (see ,
bottom panel).[^91] According to @Astorga2005 [790], these data provide
extended comparable sectoral value-added series in constant purchasing
power parity prices. Even when pre-1900 earthquakes are recorded in both
the NOAA data and my own dataset (), the economic data provided by
MOxLAD limits the scope of this paper from $1903$ to $2007$ ().

![Earthquakes in Chile: 1500-2010<span
data-label="fig:earthquake:ts:plot:chile"></span>](figure/earthquake:ts:plot:chile-1)

Chile is a good case to study infrastructural state-capacities using
this earthquake dataset since it has considerable variance regarding
quake magnitudes and locations. plots the earthquakes, the years and the
magnitudes, while plots the geographical distribution and magnitudes of
the quakes. For illustrative purposes, both plots consider the full
sample starting in $1520$ and ending in $2015$. The northern part of
Chile has historically been an industrial region, while the southern
part of Chile has traditionally been an agricultural region. Relatedly,
both regions vary according to their climate as well. Chile is arid in
the north, limiting agricultural activity, but it has a temperate
oceanic climate in the south, a more appropriated climate for
agriculture. Also, distance from Santiago, the capital city located in
the middle (around latitude 33$^{\circ}$) might impose some degree of
difficulty for the central government to reach out the farthest
northern/southern parts of the territory. All in all, given that
earthquakes happen at various latitudes and in different magnitudes,
both regions have been exposed indistinctly to a wide range of shocks.
There is also variance considering longitude. Closeness to the Andean
mountains (around longitude 70$^{\circ}$) determines the ruggedness of
the terrain, presumably making it harder for the state to penetrate
these areas.[^92] However shocks have affected the territory from coast
to mountain.[^93] In sum, quakes have shocked the country as a whole
regardless of longitude and latitude, distance from the center, type of
climate and main economic activity.

The unit of analysis is the earthquake.[^94] As an event, each
earthquake has attached to it, a death toll, a subnational location
identified by its latitude and longitude, a magnitude, the main economic
activity of the locality where the quake hit, a local population, and an
urban/rural setting. All these factors are subnational. At the national
level, I consider sectoral outputs (as a proportion), population and
year. Specifically, using a Bayesian Poisson regression,[^95] I model
the count of dead individuals caused by earthquakes. Since I am
interested in testing the effect of different sources of sectoral
contestation, both national and subnational, on death-tolls overtime,
the main variable of interest is the national proportion of agriculture
output relative to national industrial output with different slopes for
agricultural, industrial or mixed localities. I also included year
fixed-effects to account for time-varying confounding factors.[^96] For
instance, fiscal development could be a function of country-specific
prior state-building capacities. Fixed-effects should be able to account
for these and other unmeasured yearly factors such as the evolution of
the political system, demographic, climate and cultural changes as well
as economic shocks (both national and international). I also included
latitude to control for the proximity to the Andean mountains. This
variable controls for a built-in tectonic predisposition to earthquakes,
and longitude to control for climate and other unmeasured conditions
that make agricultural development more difficult. In turn, both
measurements serve as good proxies of terrain ruggedness and the
difficulties of the state in reaching these parts of the country.[^97]

More formally, I fit the next equation,

$$\label{model:1}
\begin{split}
\text{Deaths} \;\sim\; & \text{Poisson}(\lambda_{i})\\
log(\lambda_{i})  = 
&\;\mu + 
\beta_{1_j}\text{Proportion}_{i} + 
\beta_{2_j}\text{Magnitude}^2_{i} +
\beta_{3}\text{Latitude}_{i} + 
\beta_{4}\text{Longitude}_{i} + \\
& \beta_{5}\text{Population}_{i} +
\beta_{6}\text{Urban}_{i} + 
\beta_{7_t}\text{Year}_{i}
\end{split}$$

where,

$$\label{indexes:1}
\begin{split}
i_{1,...I} & \; \text{where} \; \text{I}=91\\
j_{1,...J} & \; \text{where} \; \text{J}=3\\
t_{1,...T} & \; \text{where} \; \text{T}=59;
\end{split}$$

the $i$ subscript denotes the unit of analysis (i.e. earthquake),[^98]
the $j$ index expresses the type of subnational economic composition of
the affected municipality (agricultural, industrial, or mixed), and the
$t$ subscripts denotes the year when earthquake $i$ happened. Also,
since earthquakes can happen more than once per year, in my dataset
$I > T$.[^99] Finally, $\mu$ is the intercept. Since the ‘treatment’
(sources of sectoral contestation) occurs simultaneously at the national
and subnational levels, I implement a multilevel model.[^100] The
multilevel component of allows the slope of the national proportion of
agriculture relative to industry ($\beta_{1_j}$) to vary by the $j$th
dominant subnational sector. Due to space constrains, I exclude mixed
subnational units from my theoretical analyses. Additionally, to rule
out the possibility that sectors self-select into less earthquake-prone
geographical locations, I also modeled magnitude with different slopes
($\beta_{2_j}$).[^101] The results strongly suggest that there is not a
self-selection mechanism in the data generating process. Nearly-zero
posteriors indicate that the three types of subnational localities are
affected in the same way, and that casualties are independent of the
subnational predominant sector. Finally, the estimated parameters
$\beta_{k}$ have noninformative normally distributed priors,[^102] while
precisions $\tau_{p}$ of $\beta_{1_j}$, $\beta_{2_j}$ and $\beta_{7_t}$
have noninformative Gamma priors.

More formally, I considered the following:

$$\label{indexes:2}
\begin{split}
\beta_{k,...K} \;\sim\; & \mathcal{N}(0, 0.01) \; \text{where} \; \text{K}=8\\
\tau_{p,...P} \;\sim\; & \mathcal{G}(0.5, 0.001) \; \text{where} \; \text{P}=3.
\end{split}$$

#### Do higher levels of sectoral contestation translate into state development?

shows the posterior predictive distributions of the multi-level Bayesian
Poisson regression, particularly, the predicted death counts conditional
on observed covariates. The main quantity of interest is $\beta_{1_j}$,
the coefficient on $\frac{\text{Agriculture}}{\text{Industry}}$ with
different slopes, one per type of subnational sectoral predominance. The
results strongly suggest that as the relative size of agriculture
increases, the death toll increases. Given the initial advantage of the
agricultural sector, as agriculture keeps developing rapidly leaving the
system unchallenged, national sectoral contestation decreases. Under
these circumstances the death toll increases by $13$ when the
subnational locality is *also* agricultural. This scenario exemplifies a
situation where agricultural elites are the main national *and*
subnational hegemonic elite. However, as the national proportion of
agriculture expands *in the presence of strong industrial subnational
clusters*, the death-toll decreases by $16$. To ease meaningful
interpretation of these results, shows that as the proportion of the
agricultural sector increases, the death toll decreases by a $4$-$19$
range when the average affected locality is industrial, but it increases
by a $3$-$15$ range when the average affected locality is *also*
agricultural.

<span>rrrrrr</span> & Mean & SD & Lower & Upper & Pr.\
Agr/Ind \[Agr\] & 12.68 & 7.21 & 3.73 & 22.65 & 0.98\
Agr/Ind \[Ind\] & -16.26 & 5.30 & -23.17 & -9.62 & 1.00\
Agr/Ind \[Mixed\] & -30.73 & 21.74 & -63.78 & -4.89 & 0.95\
Magnitude \[Agr\] & 0.04 & 0.02 & 0.01 & 0.06 & 0.95\
Magnitude \[Ind\] & 0.24 & 0.07 & 0.16 & 0.32 & 1.00\
Magnitude \[Mixed\] & 0.37 & 0.14 & 0.17 & 0.55 & 1.00\
Latitude & -0.01 & 0.03 & -0.05 & 0.02 & 0.69\
Longitude & -0.16 & 0.14 & -0.34 & 0.03 & 0.85\
Population & -0.01 & 0.00 & -0.02 & -0.01 & 1.00\
Urban & -1.54 & 2.01 & -4.22 & 1.00 & 0.76\
\
\
\
\
\

Substantively, these results strongly suggest that sectoral contestation
conceptualized at both the national and subnational levels had a
positive effect on state-building. These results are relevant since the
capacity the state has of enforcing and monitoring building codes
throughout the territory is affected by local differences in subnational
contestation. Should these subnational sources of contestation not be
translated into sectoral agreements, the country risked seeing the
emergence of local bosses. These local authorities for instance might
not be interested in implementing building codes coming from Santiago.
In line with my theoretical expectations, I find that these threats
fostered inter-sectoral agreements when levels of inter-sectoral
inequality were low. For instance, historical evidence suggests that
Chilean industrial elites made political compromises with agricultural
elites in exchange of having more state services and being allowed to
participate in politics under fairer conditions. This kind of sectoral
incorporation into the national project was possible contingent on the
capacity the new elites had of overthrowing the institutional order that
permitted hegemonic groups to rule without opposition. These results
find empirical support for the positive relationship between the
emergence of *local* industrial clusters and higher levels of
state-capacities. However, they do not tell us how these sectoral
dynamics impacted state-capacities *overtime*. That is what I do next.

![Death-Toll by National and Subnational Sources of Sectoral
Contestation<span
data-label="fig:sectoral:model:plot:run"></span>](figure/sectoral:model:plot:run-1)

#### Did taxation cause state-making overtime?

I argued that lower levels of inter-elite inequality led to higher
levels of sectoral contestation, fostering inter-elite compromises. In
this paper I identified one such compromise, the implementation of the
income tax law. It was argued here that the implementation of the income
tax had positive externalities for state-building overtime. Following
the same setup and using the same dataset, I fit a simpler
one-dimensional Poisson model. The only complexity that was kept were
the year fixed-effects. The main difference is the inclusion of an
indicator variable that denotes whether in year $t$ the income tax had
been implemented or not, and whose estimated parameter is the main
quantity of interest now. Just like before, the structure of the prior
mean and precision of $\beta_{1} \;\sim\; \mathcal{N}(0, 0.01)$. The
rest is the same.

More formally, I fitted the next equation:

$$\label{model:2}
\begin{split}
\text{Deaths} \;\sim\; & \text{Poisson}(\lambda_{i})\\
log(\lambda_{i})  = 
&\;\mu + 
\beta_{1}\text{Income Tax}_{i} + 
\beta_{2}\text{Magnitude}^2_{i} +
\beta_{3}\text{Latitude}_{i} + 
\beta_{4}\text{Longitude}_{i} + \\
& \beta_{5}\text{Population}_{i} +
\beta_{6}\text{Urban}_{i} + 
\beta_{7_t}\text{Year}_{i}
\end{split}$$

also shows posterior predictive distributions. The results show that
implementing the income tax overtime *decreases* death-tolls by $3$. The
effect is small. This might be due to the short dataset. shows the
disaggregated effects overtime, and how death-tolls (state capacities)
do vary, and particularly, *decrease* (increase) overtime. Before the
income tax law was implemented, death-tolls were relatively stable,
averaging 28 casualties approximately per earthquake. However, once the
income tax law was implemented, the death-toll declined from 28 to 22,
approximately.

<span>rrrrrr</span> & Mean & SD & Lower & Upper & Pr.\
Income Tax & -3.01 & 3.55 & -7.55 & 1.41 & 0.81\
Magnitude & 0.06 & 0.01 & 0.04 & 0.07 & 1.00\
Latitude & 0.06 & 0.01 & 0.04 & 0.08 & 1.00\
Longitude & -0.49 & 0.07 & -0.58 & -0.39 & 1.00\
Population & -0.02 & 0.00 & -0.02 & -0.02 & 1.00\
Urban & -5.22 & 0.73 & -6.19 & -4.35 & 1.00\
\
\
\
\
\

The endogenous capacities of efficiently monitoring individual incomes
and deploying bureaucracies throughout the territory to collect these
taxes were transfered to other state institutions via spillover effects.
This has been a long-time claim of the fiscal sociology. Here find
support for these claims. The implementation of the income tax law in
Chile increased the capacities of the state of monitoring and enforcing
building codes. The relationship between collecting revenue and getting
good at is an endogenous one. The ‘big push’ or definitive set of
initial incentives to monitor personal incomes to convert them into
public property was mobilized by the incentives of capitalizing
increasing industrial incomes (see , top panel).

Following the fiscal sociology, I contend that unlike other regular
state institutions and services, taxing incomes *required more* from the
state, producing a secular accumulation of know-how. Indirect taxation
demands less from the state. It suffices to establish a staffed office
in all ports of entry. However, direct taxation requires sending
government emissaries to the whole territory. The cumulative expertise
of know*ing*-how to send and keeping accountable local skilled tax
emissaries was transfered to other audit bodies of the state. Historical
evidence suggests that the treasury did increase the Chilean fiscal
coffers right after the implementation of the income tax law in 1924.
This suggests that there was also a denser state presence at the local
level, materialized mainly in official visits that were sent from the
capital to other regions. As the Chilean state solved its logistical and
political difficulties to do so, it generated the necessary routines and
standard procedures, applying the same norm throughout the whole
territory. For instance, it was necessary to check on accounting books
of the refinery in the north, the winery in the central valley and the
*hacienda* in the south. Eventually, these delegations became more
complex and other public services were added, such as doctors, judges,
land surveyors to solve land disputes, and engineers to check whether
ongoing repairings or edifications followed the national building norms.
Similarly, @Strayer:2005uq for instance explains how official state
delegations traveled the territory dispensing judicial decisions,
something that eventually generated the systematization, centralization
and -importantly- the monopoly of justice provision by the state. In
sum, I find that the act of *sending* bureaucrats to other parts of the
territory to collect taxes had positive externalities on other state
activities. Here, I identify one of these activities, the enforcing of
national quake-sensitive norms.

![Death-Tolls Over Time: Before and After the Implementation of the
Income Tax<span
data-label="fig:income:tax:model:plot:run"></span>](figure/income:tax:model:plot:run-1)

Final Comments\[discussion\]
============================

I argued that higher levels of sectoral competition, both nationally and
subnationally conceptualized increased state-capacities over time.
Specifically, I explained how the emergence of industrial elites lowered
levels of inter-sectoral inequality, pushing the agricultural and
industrial elites to reach agreements that materialized in investments
in state-making institutions, fostering higher levels of
state-capacities. What my empirical analyses showed were twofolds.
Death-tolls decrease (state capacities increase) when levels of
national/subnational sectoral contestation increased, and once the
income tax law was implemented. This last finding in particular finds
support for the fiscal sociology paradigm, namely, direct taxation had
positive externalities on state-capacities. This paradigm focused on the
intertwining of the development of the fiscal state and
sectoral-economic conflicts. Here I argued that higher levels of
sectoral contestation translated into more credible threats, advancing
sectoral alliances at the national level. I identified one such
compromise, the implementation of the income tax, and how this crucial
institution for state-making included the preferences of both elites.
Elite incorporation was possible contingent on the capacity the new
elites had of overthrowing the institutional order that permitted
hegemonic groups to rule without opposition. And also, it was contingent
on the benefits industrial obtained out of complying with the income
tax, particularly receiving infrastructure that benefited industrial
expansion at the subnational level.

I also introduced a novel framework that leverages the exogeneity of
earthquakes to capture how the Chilean state has been able to enforce a
number of regulations that sought to norm the construction and
infrastructure sectors. The capacity the state has of enforcing these
institutions is a projection of *overall* state capacities. Importantly,
local differences in subnational contestation affected how these
national norms were implemented. The measurement is not confounded with
levels of economic growth or type of regime either. The measurement has
a number of limitations. However, it serves as a rough butt good proxy
of state capacities. Future research should apply this measurement to
other countries, and if possible, with a larger time span.

Appendix\[appendix\]
====================

![Year Fixed Effects<span
data-label="fig:year:fixed:effects:plot"></span>](figure/year:fixed:effects:plot-1)

![Assessing Model Fit<span
data-label="fig:predicted:observed:plot"></span>](figure/predicted:observed:plot-1)

![Trace Plots: Sectoral Conflicts Model<span
data-label="fig:traplot:plot:sectoral"></span>](figure/traplot:plot:sectoral-1)

![Trace Plots: Income Tax Adoption Model<span
data-label="fig:traplot:plot:tax"></span>](figure/traplot:plot:tax-1)

![Density Plots: Sectoral Conflicts Model<span
data-label="fig:denplot:plot:sectoral"></span>](figure/denplot:plot:sectoral-1)

![Density Plots: Income Tax Adoption Model<span
data-label="fig:denplot:plot:tax"></span>](figure/denplot:plot:tax-1)

[^1]: I thank Robert Kaufman, Daniel Kelemen, Douglas Blair, Paul Poast
    for all the useful comments. I also thank the School of Arts and
    Sciences at Rutgers for granting me funds to collect part of the
    data used in this project. All errors are my own.

[^2]: @Mahoney:2010aa.

[^3]: See @Kurtz:2013aa and @Soifer2015a.

[^4]: @Bahamonde:2017ab.

[^5]: See @Ansell:2014ty.

[^6]: See for the Chilean case @Zeitlin:1984aa [13], @Bauer:2008kx [45],
    @Baland2008 [1748] and @Best1976 [56], @Rippy:1971rz,
    @Marichal:1989bh.

[^7]: @Johnston1961 [567].

[^8]: @Bahamonde:2017ab.

[^9]: @Boix:2015aa. For example, elites could use a faction of the
    existing army or hire private militias.

[^10]: My translation.

[^11]: @Hechter1980a [1085].

[^12]: @Bahamonde:2017ab and @Bahamonde:2017aa.

[^13]: See @Acemoglu:1996rm [289] and @Best1976 [50].

[^14]: @Robinson2006a [512].

[^15]: @Hirschman:1970bl.

[^16]: Ronald Rogowski in @Drake:1998pi [ch. 4]. However, see @Bates1985
    [15].

[^17]: @Tani1966 [157] explains that the absence of “wealth groups”
    makes passing an income tax law easier.

[^18]: @Boix:2015aa.

[^19]: Richard Salvucci in @Uribe-Uran:2001aa [48].

[^20]: @Keller1931 [13].

[^21]: @Wright1975 [45-46].

[^22]: Similarly, @McBride:1971fv [15] explains that “Chile’s people
    live on the soil. Her life is agricultural to the core. *Her
    government has always been of farm owners. Her Congress is made up
    chiefly of rich landlords*. Social life is dominated by families
    whose proudest possession is the ancestral estate.” Emphases are
    mine.

[^23]: @Bahamonde:2017ab.

[^24]: @Keller1931 [37-38].

[^25]: @Collier:2002db [109].

[^26]: Carmenza Gallo, in @Brautigam2008 [165]. Emphases are mine.

[^27]: @Beramendi2016.

[^28]: @Bowman1982 [451-452].

[^29]: @Musgrave1992 [98] and @Moore2004a [298]. While @Kurtz2009
    [@Kurtz:2013aa; @Soifer2015a] situate the relevant state-building
    critical juncture at the end of the colonial period, before the
    class compromises I identify in this paper, I argue that the
    implementation of the income tax was an important building block in
    this process.

[^30]: @Moore2004a [304].

[^31]: @Coatsworth2002 [10].

[^32]: @Moore2004 [14].

[^33]: @Campbell1993 [177].

[^34]: @Bertola2012 [132].

[^35]: @Anderson2006a.

[^36]: Martin et al. (in @Martin2009a [3]).

[^37]: @Hanson2013b [10] compiled 24 different types of measurements of
    state-capacities. In turn @Mata2009 constructed a combined
    measurement of 12 other indicators.

[^38]: @Mata2009 [35]. They point out particularly to the fact that data
    are usually poor or unavailable.

[^39]: I agree with @Soifer2012 [586] in that most “scholarship on state
    capacity \[...\] lack\[s\] a satisfying conceptualization and
    measurement scheme for this concept.” See also @Ferreira2017 [1292].

[^40]: See for one example @Besley2009 [1237].

[^41]: @Kurtz2007 [542]. Emphasis in original.

[^42]: See also @Kurtz2012 [618].

[^43]: @Fukuyama2013 [349].

[^44]: @Kurtz2007 [543].

[^45]: @Fukuyama2013 [348].

[^46]: Yet, @Johnson2017 [3] explain that ‘\[t\]ax revenue per capita is
    a commonly used metric of fiscal capacity,’ which in turn might work
    as a proxy of state capacities. For example, @Besley2014 adopt this
    strategy.

[^47]: @Kiser1992 [301].

[^48]: Refer to @Aronow2014
    [@Blair2012; @Blair2014; @Corstange2008; @Corstange2010; @Glynn2013; @Imai2011; @Imai2014a; @Kane2004; @KiewietDeJonge2015].

[^49]: See for example @Mann1984a
    [@Mann2008a; @Acemoglu2005a; @Saylor2012; @Thies2009; @Besley2010].

[^50]: @Huntington2014.

[^51]: @Saylor2012 [302] and @Coatsworth1974a.

[^52]: Footnote \#11.

[^53]: See for example @Robinson2016.

[^54]: See for example @Soifer2013a and @Centeno:2002qf. This technique
    is borrowed from demographers, and it compares the age structure
    (incorrectly) captured in the census with the an assumed ‘right’
    theoretical age distribution. Low-capacity states should
    inaccurately round ages or inflate certain intervals, producing
    error. This error is usually computed in the Whipple’s index which
    serves as a proxy for state capacities.

[^55]: @Soifer2012.

[^56]: @Anbarci2005 [1908].

[^57]: @Brancati2007 [719].

[^58]: He defines infrastructural power as “the capacity of the state
    \[to\] actually \[...\] penetrate civil society, and to implement
    logistically political decisions throughout the realm.”

[^59]: @Raschky2008 [627].

[^60]: @Brancati2007 [728] explains that “earthquakes constitute a
    natural experiment.” @Gignoux2016 [27] also point out “that the
    occurrence of earthquakes can be viewed as random \[allowing the
    analyses of\] these events as a set of repeated social experiments.”
    @Caruso2017 [32, unpublished] also “\[exploits\] the exogenous
    variation in the location and timing of natural disasters, as well
    as the exposure of different cohorts to the shock.”

[^61]: @Kahn2005 [271] and @Brancati2007.

[^62]: To make sure, while “earthquakes may not be preventable, it is
    possible to prevent the disasters they cause” (@Escaleras2007
    [209]). Similarly, @Anbarci2005 [1911] explain that “the potentially
    devastating effects of major earthquakes are, if not preventable, at
    least subject to significant mitigation.” For a similar approach,
    see @Noji:1996aa [130].

[^63]: @Kahn2005 [280].

[^64]: In other words, other “natural disasters can be foreseen (or
    predicted with some probability) and thus measures can be taken to
    limit their severity” (@Anbarci2005 [1908]).

[^65]: @Besley2002 [1423]. Emphases are mine. In fact, as @Kahn2005
    [273] points out to the very non-significant low correlation between
    predictable and unpredictable natural disasters.

[^66]: Emphasis is mine.

[^67]: @Ambraseys2011 [153]. Similarly, @Raschky2008 [628] argue that
    “the effects of natural hazards \[do\] not solely depend on a
    region’s topographic or climatic exposure to natural processes
    \[...\] but \[on\] the region’s *institutional* vulnerability.”
    Emphasis is mine.

[^68]: Emphases are mine.

[^69]: Similarly, @Bardhan2016 [865] explains that “unlike in the case
    of some macroeconomic policies, \[...\] the effectiveness of the
    state varies enormously across localities and administrative levels
    within the same country.”

[^70]: @Keefer2011 [1531].

[^71]: @Bilham2013 [167].

[^72]: See especially article 151.

[^73]: Thus, my measurement captures state outcomes. @Fukuyama2013 is
    very critical of ‘outcome-oriented’ measurements. However, this
    outcome is different. Unlike the proportion of tax over GDP which
    could end up being wasted (p. 353), or “educational outcomes \[which
    depend\] much more strongly on factors like friends and family” (p.
    355), death tolls associated to earthquakes are *not* ‘hard to
    measure’ (p. 356) neither they are subject to ‘normative’ concerns.
    I also disagree in that ‘econometric techniques’ to control for
    these and other factors add ‘another layer of complexity.’
    Similarly, @Kurtz2012 [619] explain that the “problem \[...\] with
    output based measures is that they necessarily include information
    on policy choice.” However, it would be hard to say that people’s
    lives are subject to ‘ideological’ or ‘policy preferences.’

[^74]: Others have studied how in some context earthquakes damage
    interpersonal trust. For example, @Carlin2014a [419] argue that
    “state capacity plays a decisive role in determining natural
    disasters’ consequences for social capital.”

[^75]: @Reed:2011. See also @Laursen2010.

[^76]: That is, “it does not rely on an effort to measure the beliefs of
    citizens about the nature of the state, the legitimacy of its
    leaders or the institutional procedures that selected them, or even
    perceptions of the efficiency of public bureaucracies” (@Kurtz2012
    [616]).

[^77]: I agree with @Kurtz2012 [619] in that an “output-linked approach
    \[...\] should only examine public sector outputs that are not
    particularly politicized, and generally perceived to be essential
    state functions across a very broad set of states.” Similarly,
    @Carlin2014a [422] explain that “a basket of ‘minimal’ state
    functions \[typically includes\] primary education, public health,
    rule of law, public finance management, and disaster relief.”

[^78]: This layer ‘sees state infrastructural power as a characteristic
    of the central state’.

[^79]: This relates to ‘how the exercise of state power shapes the
    society it controls.’

[^80]: @Keefer2011 [1534]. From a population size perspective, this
    measurement is also convenient. A “quarter of the world’s population
    inhabits \[...\] the northern edge of the Arabian and Indian Plates
    that are colliding with the southern margin of the Eurasian Plate”
    (@Bilham2013a [618]). Finally, other measurements also are
    contingent on the context. For example, @Soifer2012 [593] proposes a
    measurement of administrative capacities focusing on how states are
    able to enforce voter registration ‘where voting is mandatory.’ This
    strategy evidently shortens the sample to only democratic countries,
    introducing potential sample selection biases.

[^81]: @Dunbar2003 [164] explains that the Indian state implements
    targeted policies (that might not necessarily correspond to the
    administrative areas) based on isoseismal maps that define different
    zones of seismic hazard.

[^82]: If this were true, states with higher capacities would have
    higher death tolls, while states with lower capacities, due to their
    incapacity to count, lower death tolls.

[^83]: @Szeliga2010.

[^84]: @noaa2015.

[^85]: Importantly, the NOAA distinguishes earthquake deaths from total
    deaths (which includes tsunami casualties). I use the former.

[^86]: Particularly, censuses of 1907, 1920, 1930, 1940, 1952, 1960,
    1970, 1982, 1992, 2002 and 2012. Some of them were kept at the
    *Biblioteca Nacional* and others at the *National Statistic
    Institute* historical library.

[^87]: While in most occasions I was able to recover the actual local
    population, in some instances that was not possible. In these cases,
    I recovered the population of the most concentrated area nearby.
    Consequently, I adopted a more general approach and used the
    population variable as a control variable, not to construct a
    dependent proportion variable.

[^88]: Agricultural, industrial, or mixed (i.e., both agricultural and
    industrial).

[^89]: If more than 50% of the population lives in an urban setting, I
    assigned a 1 to that municipality, 0 otherwise. Urban concentrations
    are more likely to have vertical constructions rather than one-story
    buildings, increasing the potential number of casualties. I thank
    Daniel Kelemen for this suggestion.

[^90]: *El Mercurio* and *La Nación* newspapers, both kept at the
    *Archivo* of the *Biblioteca Nacional de Chile*.

[^91]: “These data build on the studies and statistical abstracts of the
    Economic Commission for Latin America, but also rely on Mitchell’s
    International Historical Statistics, International Monetary Fund’s
    International Financial Statistics, the World Bank’s World
    Development Indicators and a variety of national sources.” I used
    the *agriculture value-added* and *manufacturing value-added*
    variables. The former measures “the output of the sector net of
    intermediate inputs and includes the cultivation of crops, livestock
    production, hunting, forestry and fishing.” The later “\[r\]eports
    the output of the sector net of intermediate inputs.” Both of them
    are expressed in local currency at 1970 constant prices.

[^92]: Moreover, @Brancati2007 [729] explains that “\[e\]arthquakes
    often occur in mountainous areas.”

[^93]: Since “most of the damage in major earthquakes occurs within 30
    km of the epicenter,” (@Dunbar2003 [172]) I don’t necessarily drop
    quakes that didn’t happen on land. While the epicenter might have
    happened a few miles away from the shore, the consequences certainly
    reached the land.

[^94]: @Kahn2005 [273] also considers that “the unit of analysis is
    \[the\] disaster.”

[^95]: @Anbarci2005 [1907] use “a Negative Binomial estimation strategy
    with both random and fixed estimators” to estimate death tolls,
    @Kahn2005 [276] estimates a Zero Inflated Negative Binomial model,
    @Brancati2007 [729] uses “a negative binomial model with robust
    standard errors clustered by country,” and @Escaleras2007 use “a
    Negative Binomial specification.” Yet, no study tests for over
    dispersion. In my dataset I do not find evidence for that, hence I
    employ a Poisson model.

[^96]: @Brancati2007 [729] also includes in his analyses “year-fixed
    effects to control for trends over time.”

[^97]: Undoubtedly, there are many more factors that might increase the
    death tolls. @Ambraseys2011 [154] for example explain that the
    “number of fatalities depends on whether an earthquake happens at
    night or during the day, in the winter or in the summer, in a
    mountainous region or in a valley, after strong and protracted
    fore-shocks and with or without warning.” While in my model some of
    these factors are accounted for, I do not have complete data on the
    hour of the shock. However, @Lomnitz1970 [1309] explains that “some
    of the larger Chilean earthquakes which have caused deaths” between
    the 1900’s and the 1960’s have been afternoon quakes. See especially
    Table 1 in p. 1310. Other factors such as “the speed of tectonic
    movements \[and\] the degree to which the lower plate bends the
    upper plate” and the focal depth (@Keefer2011 [1534]) could not be
    included due to the lack of complete data overtime. However, the
    year fixed effects could pick up at some extent these unmeasured
    components.

[^98]: @Kahn2005 [278] follows the same strategy.

[^99]: For the years in which there is just one earthquake, the ‘group’
    variable has only one observation. This does not endangers the
    robustness of the model. @Gelman:2006bh [276] explain that it “is
    even acceptable to have one observation in many of the groups.”

[^100]: @Gelman:2006bh [237]. I do not claim in any way this is a causal
    method.

[^101]: [According](https://data.noaa.gov/dataset/earthquake-damage-general)
    to the NOAA, an “increase of one in magnitude represents a tenfold
    increase in the recorded wave amplitude.” Consequently the effect of
    this variable should not be linear. Consequently, both in and I
    consider the square term of magnitude.

[^102]: “Noninformative prior distributions are intended to allow
    Bayesian inference for parameters about which not much is known
    beyond the data included in the analysis at hand” (@Gelman2006
    [520]).
